THE BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY ACT, 2002
(ACT NO. 18 OF 2003)

An Act to provide for conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of its components and fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the use of biological resources, knowledge and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement.--
(1) This Act may be called the Biological Diversity Act, 2002.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.

Section 2. Definitions.--
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--
(a) "benefit sharing" or "fair and equitable benefit sharing" means sharing of benefits as determined by the National Biodiversity Authority under section 21;
(b) "biological resources" means plants, animals and micro-organisms or parts thereof, their genetic material and by-products (with actual or potential use or value) but does not include value added products and human genetic material;
(c) "bio-survey and bio-utilization" means survey or collection of species, subspecies, genes, components and extracts of biological resource for any purpose and includes characterization, inventorisation and bioassay;
(d) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the National Biodiversity Authority or, as the case may be, of the State Biodiversity Board;
(e) "commercial utilization" means end uses of biological resources for commercial utilization such as drugs, industrial enzymes, food flavours, fragrance, cosmetics, emulsifiers, oleoresins, colours, extracts and genes used for improving crops and livestock through genetic intervention, but does not include conventional breeding or traditional practices in use in agriculture, horticulture, poultry, dairy farming, agriculture or bee keeping;
(f) "contractual agreements" means agreements entered into by the National Biodiversity Authority or the State Biodiversity Board with the applicant for access to biological resources or knowledge associated thereto;
(g) "member" means a member of the National Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity Board and includes the Chairperson;
(h) "National Biodiversity Authority" means the National Biodiversity Authority established under section 8;
(i) "research" means study or systematic investigation of any biological resource or technological application, that uses biological systems, living organisms or derivatives thereof to make or modify products or processes for any specific use;
(j) "State Biodiversity Board" means the State Biodiversity Board established under section 22;
(k) "sustainable use" means the use of components of biological diversity in such manner and at such rate that does not lead to the long-term decline of the biological diversity thereby maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of present and future generations;
(l) "value added products" means products which may contain portion or extracts of plants and animals in unrecognizable and physically inseparable form.

CHAPTER II
REGULATION OF ACCESS TO BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY

Section 3. Certain persons not to undertake Biodiversity related activities without approval of National Biodiversity Authority.--
(1) No person referred to in sub-section (2) shall, without previous approval of the National Biodiversity Authority, obtain any biological resource occurring in India or knowledge associated thereto for research or for commercial utilization or for bio-survey and bio-utilization.
(2) The persons who shall require approval under sub-section (1) are the following, namely:--
(a) a person who is not a citizen of India;
(b) a citizen of India, who is a non-resident as defined in clause (30) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(c) a body corporate, association or organization--
(i) not incorporated or registered in India; or
(ii) incorporated or registered in India under any law for the time being in force which has any non-Indian participation in its share capital or management.

Section 4. Results of research not to be transferred to certain persons without approval of National Biodiversity Authority.--
No person shall, without the previous approval of the National Biodiversity Authority, transfer the results of any research relating to any biological resources occurring in, or obtained from, India to any person who is not a citizen of India or who is a non-resident as defined in clause (30) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 or to any body corporate or organisation which is not registered or incorporated in India or which has any non-Indian participation in its share capital or management.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this section, "transfer" does not include publication of research papers or dissemination of knowledge in any seminar or workshop, if such publications are as per the guidelines specified by the Central Government.

Section 5. Sections 3 and 4 not to apply to collaborative research projects.--
(1) The provisions of sections 3 and 4 shall not apply to collaborative research projects involving transfer or use of biological resources or knowledge relating thereto between institutions, including Government sponsored institutions of India, and such institutions in other countries, if such collaborative research projects satisfy the conditions specified in sub-section (3).
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), collaborative research projects shall satisfy the following conditions, namely:--
(a) collaborative research projects shall conform to the policy guidelines issued by the Central Government in this behalf;
(b) collaborative research projects shall be approved by the Central Government.

Section 6. Application for intellectual property rights not to be made without approval of National Biodiversity Authority.--
(1) No person shall apply for any intellectual property right, by whatever name called, in or outside India for any invention based on any research or information on a biological resource obtained from India, without obtaining the previous approval of the National Biodiversity Authority before making such application:
Provided that if a person applies for a patent, permission of the National Biodiversity Authority may be obtained after the acceptance of the patent but before the sealing of the patent by the patent authority concerned:
Provided further that the National Biodiversity Authority shall dispose of the application for permission given to it within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt thereof.
(2) The National Biodiversity Authority may, while granting the approval under this section, impose benefit sharing fee or royalty or conditions on the sharing of financial benefits arising out of the commercial utilisation of such rights.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person making an application for any right under any law relating to protection of plant varieties enacted by Parliament.
(4) Where any right is granted under any law relating to protection of plant varieties enacted by Parliament, the authority granting such right shall endorse a copy of such grant to the National Biodiversity Authority.

Section 7. Prior intimation to State Biodiversity Board for accessing biological resource for commercial utilization.--
No person, who is a citizen of India or a body corporate, association or organisation registered in India, shall obtain any biological resource for commercial utilisation, or bio-survey and bio-utilisation for commercial utilisation except after giving prior intimation to the State Biodiversity Board concerned:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the local people and communities of the area, including growers and cultivators of biodiversity, and vaids and hakims, who have been practising indigenous medicine.

CHAPTER III
NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY

Section 8. Establishment of National Biodiversity Authority.--
(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act, a body to be called the National Biodiversity Authority.
(2) The National Biodiversity Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be at Chennai and the National Biodiversity Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other places in India.
(4) The National Biodiversity Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:--
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent person having adequate knowledge and experience in the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and in matters relating to equitable sharing of benefits, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(b) three ex officio members appointed by the Central Government, one each representing the Ministries dealing with Tribal Affairs, Environment and Forests, and Agricultural Research and Education;
(c) seven ex officio members appointed by the Central Government to represent the Ministries or Departments of the Central Government;
(d) five non-official members to be appointed from amongst specialists and scientists, representatives of industry, and conservationists.

Section 9. Conditions of service of Chairperson and members.--
The term of office and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the members, other than ex officio members, of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.

Section 10. Resignation of members.--
The Chairperson or any member, other than ex officio members, of the National Biodiversity Authority may resign his office by giving notice in writing under his hand to the Central Government.

Section 11. Removal of members.--
The Central Government may remove from office the Chairperson or any member, other than ex officio members, of the National Biodiversity Authority if he is convicted of an offence, becomes bankrupt, or becomes physically or mentally incapable of acting as member.

Section 12. Meetings of National Biodiversity Authority.--
(1) The National Biodiversity Authority shall meet at such time and place and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed.
(2) The Chairperson, or if for any reason he is unable to attend any meeting, any other member chosen by the members present at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting.

Section 13. Committees of National Biodiversity Authority.--
(1) The National Biodiversity Authority may constitute a committee for any purpose, consisting of such number of persons as it may think fit.
(2) The National Biodiversity Authority may co-opt any person as a member of any committee constituted under sub-section (1).

Section 14. Officers and employees of National Biodiversity Authority.--
(1) The National Biodiversity Authority may appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The terms and conditions of service of officers and other employees of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.

CHAPTER IV
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY

Section 18. Functions and powers of National Biodiversity Authority.--
(1) It shall be the duty of the National Biodiversity Authority to advise the Central Government on matters relating to the conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of its components and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of biological resources and knowledge.
(2) The National Biodiversity Authority may, on behalf of the Central Government, take any measures necessary to oppose the grant of intellectual property rights in any country outside India on any biological resource obtained from India or knowledge associated with such biological resource which is derived from India.
(3) The National Biodiversity Authority may grant approval for undertaking activities referred to in sections 3, 4 and 6.
(4) The National Biodiversity Authority may perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Central Government or as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.

CHAPTER V
APPROVAL BY THE NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY

Section 19. Approval by National Biodiversity Authority for undertaking certain activities or applying for intellectual property rights.--
(1) Any person referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3 who intends to obtain any biological resource occurring in India or knowledge associated thereto for research or for commercial utilization or for bio-survey and bio-utilization shall make application in such form and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, to the National Biodiversity Authority.
(2) Any person who intends to transfer the results of any research relating to biological resources occurring in, or obtained from, India to any person referred to in section 4 shall make application in such form and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, to the National Biodiversity Authority.
(3) Any person who intends to apply for a patent or any other intellectual property right referred to in sub-section (1) of section 6 shall make application in such form and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, to the National Biodiversity Authority.
(4) On receipt of application under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), the National Biodiversity Authority may, after making such enquiries as it considers necessary and after consulting the Biodiversity Management Committees concerned, by order, grant approval subject to such terms and conditions as it may deem fit, or reject the application:
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

Section 20. Transfer of biological resource or knowledge.--
(1) No person who has been granted approval under section 19 shall transfer any biological resource or knowledge associated thereto which is the subject matter of the approval except with the permission of the National Biodiversity Authority.
(2) Any person who intends to transfer any biological resource or knowledge referred to in sub-section (1) shall make an application in such form and in such manner, and on payment of such fee, as may be prescribed, to the National Biodiversity Authority.

Section 21. Determination of benefit sharing by National Biodiversity Authority.--
(1) The National Biodiversity Authority shall while granting approvals under section 19 or section 20 ensure that the terms and conditions subject to which approval is granted secures the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of accessed biological resources, their derivatives or innovations and practices relating to their use between the persons applying for such approval, local bodies concerned and the benefit claimers.
(2) The National Biodiversity Authority shall determine the benefit sharing such as grant of joint ownership of intellectual property rights, transfer of technology, location of production, research and development units, association of Indian scientists with R&D, and payment of monetary compensation or non-monetary benefit to the benefit claimers.
(3) The amount of monetary benefit or royalty shall be deposited in the National Biodiversity Fund: Provided that where biological resource or knowledge was accessed from a specific individual or group of individuals or organisations, the National Biodiversity Authority may direct that the amount shall be paid directly to such benefit claimer.

CHAPTER VI
STATE BIODIVERSITY BOARD

Section 22. Establishment of State Biodiversity Board.--
(1) With effect from such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act a Board for the State to be known as the State Biodiversity Board.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal.

Section 23. Functions of State Biodiversity Board.--
The functions of the State Biodiversity Board shall be to--
(a) advise the State Government, subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government, on matters relating to the conservation of biodiversity, sustainable use of its components and equitable sharing of benefits;
(b) regulate by granting approvals or otherwise requests for commercial utilisation or bio-survey and bio-utilisation of any biological resource by Indians;
(c) perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act or as may be prescribed by the State Government.

Section 24. Power of State Biodiversity Board to restrict certain activities violating objectives of conservation, etc.--
(1) Any citizen of India or a body corporate, association or organisation registered in India intending to undertake commercial utilisation or bio-survey and bio-utilisation for commercial utilisation of any biological resource shall give prior intimation to the State Biodiversity Board in the prescribed form.
(2) On receipt of an intimation under sub-section (1), the Board may, in consultation with the local bodies concerned and after making such enquiries as it may deem fit, by order, prohibit or restrict any such activity if it is of opinion that such activity is detrimental or contrary to the objectives of conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity or equitable sharing of benefits.

CHAPTER VII
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT OF NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY

Section 26. Grants or loans by the Central Government.--
The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the National Biodiversity Authority grants and loans of such sums of money as that Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.

Section 27. National Biodiversity Fund.--
(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the National Biodiversity Fund and there shall be credited thereto--
(a) any grants and loans made to the National Biodiversity Authority by the Central Government;
(b) all charges and royalties received by the National Biodiversity Authority under this Act;
(c) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by the Central Government.

Section 28. Operation of National Biodiversity Fund.--
The National Biodiversity Fund shall be applied for--
(a) channelling benefits to the benefit claimers;
(b) conservation and promotion of biological resources and development of areas where from such biological resources or knowledge was accessed;
(c) socio-economic development of areas referred to in clause (b) in consultation with the local bodies concerned.

Section 29. Annual report of National Biodiversity Authority.--
The National Biodiversity Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.

Section 30. Budget, accounts and audit.--
(1) The National Biodiversity Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

CHAPTER VIII
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT OF STATE BIODIVERSITY BOARD

Section 31. Grants or loans by the State Government.--
The State Government may, after due appropriation made by State Legislature by law in this behalf, make to the State Biodiversity Board grants and loans of such sums of money as that Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.

Section 32. State Biodiversity Fund.--
(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the State Biodiversity Fund and there shall be credited thereto all grants, loans, charges and royalties received by the State Biodiversity Board.

Section 33. Operation of State Biodiversity Fund.--
The State Biodiversity Fund shall be applied for conservation of biological resources, benefit sharing to benefit claimers, and socio-economic development of areas where biological resources have been accessed.

CHAPTER IX
DUTIES OF THE CENTRAL AND THE STATE GOVERNMENTS

Section 36. Central Government to develop national strategies, plans, etc. for conservation, etc. of biological diversity.--
(1) The Central Government shall develop national strategies, plans, programmes for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.
(2) The Central Government shall as far as possible integrate the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity into relevant sectoral or cross-sectoral plans, programmes and policies.
(3) The Central Government shall undertake measures to identify components of biological diversity important for its conservation, and monitor categories of components of biological diversity which require urgent conservation measures.

Section 37. Biodiversity heritage sites.--
(1) The State Government may, from time to time in notification in the Official Gazette, notify in consultation with the local bodies, areas of biodiversity importance as biodiversity heritage sites under this Act.
(2) The State Government, in consultation with the Central Government, may frame rules for the management and conservation of all the biodiversity heritage sites.

Section 38. Power of Central Government to notify threatened species.--
Without prejudice to the provisions of any other law for the time being in force, the Central Government may, in consultation with the State Government concerned, notify from time to time any species which is on the verge of extinction or likely to become extinct in the near future as a threatened species, and prohibit or regulate collection thereof for any purpose and take appropriate steps to rehabilitate and preserve those species.

Section 39. Power of Central Government to designate repositories.--
(1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the National Biodiversity Authority, designate institutions as repositories under this Act for different categories of biological resources.
(2) The repositories designated under sub-section (1) shall keep in safe custody the biological resources deposited with them and provide access to them in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

Section 40. Exemption for normally traded commodities.--
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may, in consultation with the National Biodiversity Authority, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the provisions of this Act shall not apply to any items including biological resources normally traded as commodities.

CHAPTER X
BIODIVERSITY MANAGEMENT COMMITTEES

Section 41. Constitution of Biodiversity Management Committees.--
(1) Every local body shall constitute a Biodiversity Management Committee within its area for the purpose of promoting conservation, sustainable use and documentation of biological diversity including preservation of habitats, conservation of land races, folk varieties and cultivars, domesticated stocks and breeds of animals and microorganisms and chronicling of knowledge relating to biological diversity.
(2) The National Biodiversity Authority and the State Biodiversity Boards shall consult the Biodiversity Management Committees while taking any decision relating to the use of biological resources and knowledge associated with such resources occurring within the territorial jurisdiction of the Biodiversity Management Committee.
(3) The Biodiversity Management Committees may levy charges by way of collection fees from any person for accessing or collecting any biological resource for commercial purpose from areas falling within its territorial jurisdiction.

CHAPTER XI
LOCAL BIODIVERSITY FUND

Section 42. Grants to Local Biodiversity Fund.--
The State Government may, after due appropriation made by State Legislature by law in this behalf, make to the Local Biodiversity Fund grants and loans of such sums of money as that Government may think fit.

Section 43. Constitution of Local Biodiversity Fund.--
(1) There shall be constituted a Local Biodiversity Fund in every area where a Biodiversity Management Committee is constituted, and there shall be credited thereto all grants, loans and collection fees received by the Committee.

Section 44. Application of Local Biodiversity Fund.--
The Local Biodiversity Fund shall be applied for the conservation and promotion of biological diversity in areas falling within the jurisdiction of the Biodiversity Management Committee and for benefit sharing to local communities.

Section 45. Annual statement of accounts.--
The Biodiversity Management Committee shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts.

Section 46. Submit annual report.--
The Biodiversity Management Committee shall prepare its annual report and submit a copy thereof to the local body concerned.

CHAPTER XII
MISCELLANEOUS

Section 48. National Biodiversity Authority to be bound by directions given by Central Government.--
(1) In the discharge of its functions and performance of its duties under this Act, the National Biodiversity Authority shall be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time.

Section 49. Power of State Government to give directions.--
(1) In the discharge of its functions and performance of its duties under this Act, the State Biodiversity Board shall be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the State Government may give in writing to it from time to time.

Section 50. Settlement of disputes between State Biodiversity Boards.--
(1) If any dispute arises between two or more State Biodiversity Boards regarding access to biological resources or benefit sharing, the National Biodiversity Authority shall hear and decide the dispute.

Section 52. Appeal to High Court / National Green Tribunal.--
Any person aggrieved by any determination of benefit sharing or order of the National Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity Board under this Act, may file an appeal to the High Court or National Green Tribunal within thirty days from the date of communication of the order or determination to him.

Section 53. Execution of determination or order of National Biodiversity Authority or State Biodiversity Board.--
Every determination of benefit sharing or order made by the National Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity Board under this Act shall be enforceable by the Authority or Board as if it were a decree made by a civil court in a suit.

Section 54. Protection of action taken in good faith.--
No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, State Government, National Biodiversity Authority or State Biodiversity Board, or any member, officer or employee of the Authority or Board for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or rules made thereunder.

Section 55. Penalties for contravention of sections 3, 4, 6 and 7.--
(1) Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of section 3 or section 4 or section 6 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and where the damage caused exceeds ten lakh rupees such fine may commensurate with the damage caused, or with both.
(2) Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of section 7 or any order made under sub-section (2) of section 24 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.

Section 56. Penalty for contravention of directions or orders of Authority, State Biodiversity Board, etc.--
If any person contravenes any direction given under section 48 or section 49 or any order made by the Authority or State Biodiversity Board for which no punishment is separately provided in this Act, he shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in case of a second or subsequent offence, with a fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and in the case of continuous contravention with additional fine which may extend to two thousand rupees for everyday during which the default continues.

Section 57. Offences by companies.--
(1) Where an offence or contravention under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence or contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Section 58. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.--
The offences under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.

Section 59. Act to have effect in addition to other Acts.--
The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force relating to forests, wildlife and protection of environment.

Section 60. Power of Central Government to make rules.--
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Section 61. Power of State Government to make rules.--
(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Section 62. Power to remove difficulties.--
(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty.
