THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940
(ACT NO. 23 OF 1940)

An Act to regulate the import, manufacture, distribution and sale of drugs and cosmetics.

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement.--
(1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.

Section 2. Application of other laws not barred.--
The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930, and any other law for the time being in force.

Section 3. Definitions.--
In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,--
(a) "Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug" includes all medicines intended for internal or external use for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease or disorder in human beings or animals, and manufactured exclusively in accordance with the formulae described in the authoritative books of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb systems of medicine, specified in the First Schedule;
(aa) "the Board" means--
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under section 33C; and
(ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, the Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under section 5;
(b) "drug" includes--
(i) all medicines for internal or external use of human beings or animals and all substances intended to be used for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of any disease or disorder in human beings or animals, including preparations applied on human body for the purpose of repelling insects like mosquitoes;
(ii) such substances (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any function of the human body or intended to be used for the destruction of vermin or insects which cause disease in human beings or animals, as may be specified by the Central Government from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette;
(iii) all substances intended for use as components of a drug including empty gelatin capsules; and
(iv) such devices intended for internal or external use in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease or disorder in human beings or animals, as may be specified by the Central Government;
(c) "cosmetic" means any article intended to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled or sprayed on, or introduced into, or otherwise applied to, the human body or any part thereof for cleansing, beautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance, and includes any article intended for use as a component of cosmetic;
(d) "Government Analyst" means--
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, a Government Analyst appointed by the Central Government or State Government under section 33F; and
(ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, a Government Analyst appointed under section 20;
(e) "Inspector" means--
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug, an Inspector appointed under section 33G; and
(ii) in relation to any other drug or cosmetic, an Inspector appointed under section 21;
(f) "manufacture" in relation to any drug or cosmetic includes any process or part of a process for making, altering, ornamenting, finishing, packing, labelling, breaking up or otherwise treating or adopting any drug or cosmetic with a view to its sale or distribution, but does not include the compounding or dispensing of any drug, or the packing of any drug or cosmetic, in the ordinary course of retail business;
(g) "patent or proprietary medicine" means,--
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Tibb systems of medicine, a formulation containing only such ingredients mentioned in the formulae described in the authoritative books of Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani Tibb systems specified in the First Schedule, but does not include a medicine which is administered by parenteral route and also a formulation which, in the opinion of the Licensing Authority, is simple combination of such ingredients;
(ii) in relation to any other system of medicine, a drug which is a remedy or prescription presented in a form ready for internal or external administration of human beings or animals and which is not with a monograph or formula specified in the edition of the Indian Pharmacopoeia for the time being in force or any other pharmacopoeia.

Section 4. Presumption as to medicines.--
Any medicine or preparation shall be presumed to be a drug or cosmetic unless the contrary is proved.

CHAPTER II
THE DRUGS TECHNICAL ADVISORY BOARD, THE CENTRAL DRUGS LABORATORY AND THE DRUGS CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE

Section 5. The Drugs Technical Advisory Board.--
(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute a Board (to be called the Drugs Technical Advisory Board) to advise the Central Government and the State Governments on technical matters arising out of the administration of this Act and to carry out the other functions assigned to it by this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of the Director General of Health Services (Chairperson), the Drugs Controller of India, the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory, Kolkata, the Director of the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, the Director of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, the President of the Pharmacy Council of India, the President of the Medical Council of India, and other nominated members representing pharmaceutical industry and clinicians.

Section 6. The Central Drugs Laboratory.--
(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, establish a Central Drugs Laboratory under the control of a Director to be appointed by the Central Government, to carry out the functions entrusted to it by this Act or any rules made thereunder.

Section 7. The Drugs Consultative Committee.--
(1) The Central Government may constitute an advisory committee to be called "the Drugs Consultative Committee" to advise the Central Government, the State Governments and the Drugs Technical Advisory Board on any matter tending to secure uniformity throughout India in the administration of this Act.

CHAPTER III
IMPORT OF DRUGS AND COSMETICS

Section 8. Standards of quality.--
(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "standard quality" means--
(a) in relation to a drug, that the drug complies with the standard set out in the Second Schedule;
(b) in relation to a cosmetic, that the cosmetic complies with such standards as may be prescribed.

Section 9. Misbranded drugs.--
For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be misbranded--
(a) if it is so coloured, coated, powdered or polished that damage is concealed or if it is made to appear of better or greater therapeutic value than it really is; or
(b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or
(c) if its label or container or anything accompanying the drug bears any statement, design or device which makes any false claim for the drug or which is false or misleading in any particular.

Section 9A. Adulterated drugs.--
For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be adulterated--
(a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance; or
(b) if it has been prepared, packed or held under insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth, or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; or
(c) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health.

Section 9B. Spurious drugs.--
For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be spurious--
(a) if it is imported under a name which belongs to another drug; or
(b) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, another drug or resembles another drug in a manner likely to deceive or bears upon it or upon its label or container the name of another drug unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such other drug; or
(c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual or company purporting to be the manufacturer of the drug, which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist.

Section 10. Prohibition of import of certain drugs or cosmetics.--
From such date as may be fixed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, no person shall import--
(a) any drug or cosmetic which is not of standard quality;
(b) any misbranded drug or misbranded cosmetic;
(c) any adulterated or spurious drug;
(d) any drug or cosmetic for the import of which a licence is prescribed, otherwise than under, and in accordance with, such licence.

Section 10A. Power of Central Government to prohibit import of drugs and cosmetics in public interest.--
Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central Government is satisfied that the use of any drug or cosmetic is likely to involve any risk to human beings or animals or that any drug does not have the therapeutic value claimed or purported to be claimed for it or contains ingredients and in such quantity for which there is no therapeutic justification and that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit the import of such drug or cosmetic.

CHAPTER IV
MANUFACTURE, SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF DRUGS AND COSMETICS

Section 16. Standards of quality.--
(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "standard quality" means--
(a) in relation to a drug, that the drug complies with the standard set out in the Second Schedule; and
(b) in relation to a cosmetic, that the cosmetic complies with such standards as may be prescribed.

Section 17. Misbranded drugs.--
For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be misbranded--
(a) if it is so coloured, coated, powdered or polished that damage is concealed or if it is made to appear of better or greater therapeutic value than it really is; or
(b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or
(c) if its label or container bears any statement, design or device which makes any false claim for the drug or which is false or misleading in any particular.

Section 17A. Adulterated drugs.--
For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be adulterated--
(a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance; or
(b) if it has been prepared, packed or held under insanitary conditions; or
(c) if it bears or contains, for purposes of colouring only, a colour other than one which is prescribed.

Section 17B. Spurious drugs.--
For the purposes of this Chapter, a drug shall be deemed to be spurious--
(a) if it is manufactured under a name which belongs to another drug; or
(b) if it is an imitation of, or a substitute for, another drug; or
(c) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly a product.

Section 18. Prohibition of manufacture and sale of certain drugs and cosmetics.--
From such date as may be fixed by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, no person shall himself or by any other person on his behalf--
(a) manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute--
(i) any drug which is not of a standard quality, or is misbranded, adulterated or spurious;
(ii) any cosmetic which is not of a standard quality or is misbranded, adulterated or spurious;
(iii) any patent or proprietary medicine, unless there is displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or container thereof the true formula or list of active ingredients contained therein together with the quantities thereof;
(iv) any drug which by means of any statement, design or device accompanying it or by any other means, purports or claims to prevent, cure or mitigate any such disease or ailment as may be prescribed;
(v) any cosmetic containing any ingredient which may render it unsafe or harmful for use under the directions indicated or recommended.

Section 18A. Disclosure of the name of the manufacturer.--
Every person who beneficially owns or controls any drug or cosmetic shall, if so required by an Inspector, disclose to the Inspector the name, address and other particulars of the person from whom he acquired the drug or cosmetic.

Section 18B. Maintenance of records and furnishing of information.--
Every person holding a licence under a clause of section 18 shall maintain such records, registers and other documents as may be prescribed and shall furnish to the Inspector or other authority such information as required.

Section 20. Government Analysts.--
(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Government Analysts for such areas and in respect of such drugs or classes of drugs or cosmetics as may be specified in the notification.

Section 21. Inspectors.--
(1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Inspectors for such areas as may be assigned to them.

Section 22. Powers of Inspectors.--
(1) Subject to the provisions of section 23 and of any rules made by the Central Government in this behalf, an Inspector may, within the local limits of the area for which he is appointed,--
(a) inspect--
(i) any premises wherein any drug or cosmetic is being manufactured and the means employed for standardising and testing the drug or cosmetic;
(ii) any premises wherein any drug or cosmetic is being sold, or stocked or exhibited or offered for sale, or distributed;
(b) take samples of any drug or cosmetic;
(c) search any person, vehicle or vessel;
(d) examine any record, register, document or other material object found in any place.

Section 26A. Power of Central Government to prohibit manufacture, etc., of drug and cosmetic in public interest.--
Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central Government is satisfied that the use of any drug or cosmetic is likely to involve any risk to human beings or animals or that any drug does not have the therapeutic value claimed or purported to be claimed for it and that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, regulate, restrict or prohibit the manufacture, sale or distribution of such drug or cosmetic.

Section 27. Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of drugs in contravention of this Chapter.--
Whoever, himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures for sale or for distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhibits or offers for sale, or distributes--
(a) any drug deemed to be adulterated under section 17A or spurious under section 17B, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees;
(b) any drug without a valid licence under section 18 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to five years and with fine.

CHAPTER IVA
PROVISIONS RELATING TO AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS

Section 33B. Application of Chapter IVA.--
This Chapter shall apply only to Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs.

Section 33C. Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board.--
(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute a Board (to be called the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board) to advise the Central Government and the State Governments on technical matters arising out of the administration of this Chapter and to carry out the other functions assigned to it by this Chapter.
(2) The Board shall consist of the Director General of Health Services (ex officio Chairperson), the Adviser (Ayurveda) and Adviser (Unani) to the Government of India, the Director of the Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences, representative of Pharmacy Council of India, practitioners and experts of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani systems.

Section 33D. Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee.--
(1) The Central Government may constitute an advisory committee to be called "the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee" to advise the Central Government, the State Governments and the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board on any matter tending to secure uniformity throughout India in the administration of this Chapter.

Section 33E. Misbranded drugs.--
For the purposes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug shall be deemed to be misbranded--
(a) if it is so coloured, coated, powdered or polished that damage is concealed, or if it is made to appear of better or greater therapeutic value than it really is; or
(b) if it is not labelled in the prescribed manner; or
(c) if its label or container or anything accompanying the drug bears any statement, design or device which makes any false claim for the drug or which is false or misleading in any particular.

Section 33EE. Adulterated drugs.--
For the purposes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug shall be deemed to be adulterated--
(a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance; or
(b) if it has been prepared, packed or held under insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth, or rendered injurious to health; or
(c) if it contains any harmful or toxic substance which may render it injurious to health; or
(d) if any substance has been mixed therewith so as to reduce its quality or strength.

Section 33EEA. Spurious drugs.--
For the purposes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug shall be deemed to be spurious--
(a) if it is sold, or offered or exposed for sale, under a name which belongs to another Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug; or
(b) if it is an imitation of, or a substitute for, another Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug or resembles another drug in a manner likely to deceive; or
(c) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly a product.

Section 33EEB. Regulation of manufacture for sale of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs.--
No person shall manufacture for sale or for distribution any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug except under, and in accordance with the conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under this Chapter:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to Vaids and Hakims who prepare Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs for the use of their own patients.

Section 33EEC. Prohibition of manufacture and sale of certain Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs.--
From such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, no person, either by himself or by any other person on his behalf, shall manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, or stock or exhibit or offer for sale, or distribute--
(a) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug which is misbranded, adulterated or spurious;
(b) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug without a valid licence;
(c) any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug containing any ingredient not specified in the First Schedule or authoritative texts without prior permission of the Licensing Authority.

Section 33EED. Power of Central Government to prohibit manufacture, etc., of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs in public interest.--
If the Central Government is satisfied that the use of any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug is likely to involve any risk to human beings or animals or that any such drug does not have the therapeutic value claimed for it, and that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, regulate, restrict or prohibit the manufacture, sale or distribution of such drug.

Section 33F. Government Analysts.--
(1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Government Analysts for Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.

Section 33G. Inspectors.--
(1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint Inspectors having prescribed qualifications for Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.

Section 33H. Application of provisions of sections 22, 23, 24 and 25.--
The provisions of sections 22, 23, 24 and 25 shall apply in relation to Inspectors and Government Analysts appointed for Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs as they apply in relation to Inspectors and Government Analysts appointed for other drugs.

Section 33I. Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs in contravention of this Chapter.--
Whoever manufactures for sale or distribution or sells any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug in contravention of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine.

Section 33J. Penalty for subsequent offences.--
Whoever having been convicted of an offence under section 33I is again convicted of an offence under that section shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six years and with fine.

Section 33K. Confiscation.--
Where any person has been convicted of an offence under this Chapter, the stock of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug in respect of which the offence has been committed shall be liable to confiscation.

Section 33N. Power of Central Government to make rules.--
(1) The Central Government may, after consultation with, or on the recommendation of, the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter.

CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS

Section 33P. Power of Central Government to give directions.--
The Central Government may give such directions to any State Government as may appear to the Central Government to be necessary for carrying into execution in the State any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder.

Section 34. Offences by companies.--
(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Section 35. Publication of sentences passed under this Act.--
If any person is convicted of an offence under this Act, the court may cause the offender's name, place of residence, the offence of which he has been convicted and the penalty imposed to be published in such newspaper or in such other manner as the court may direct.

Section 36. Magistrate's power to impose enhanced penalties.--
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, it shall be lawful for any Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class to pass any sentence authorized by this Act.

Section 37. Protection of action taken in good faith.--
No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.

Section 38. Rules to be laid before Parliament.--
Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
