THE PATENTS ACT, 1970
(ACT NO. 39 OF 1970)

An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to patents.

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement.--
(1) This Act may be called the Patents Act, 1970.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Section 2. Definitions and interpretation.--
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--
(a) [Omitted by the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2021 (33 of 2021)];
(ab) "assignee" includes the legal representative of a deceased assignee, and references to the assignee of any person include references to the assignee of the legal representative or assignee of that person;
(b) "basic application" means an application for a patent, or for other similar protection, made in a convention country;
(c) "complete specification" means a specification referred to in section 10;
(d) "convention application" means an application for a patent made by virtue of section 135;
(e) "convention country" means a country notified as such under section 133;
(f) "exclusive licence" means a licence from a patentee which confers on the licensee, or on the licensee and persons authorised by him, to the exclusion of all other persons (including the patentee), any right in respect of the patented invention;
(g) [Omitted by the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005];
(h) "Government undertaking" means any department of the Government, a Government company, a corporation established by a Central, Provincial or State Act;
(i) "High Court", in relation to a State or Union territory, means the High Court having territorial jurisdiction in that State or Union territory;
(j) "invention" means a new product or process involving an inventive step and capable of industrial application;
(ja) "inventive step" means a feature of an invention that involves technical advance as compared to the existing knowledge or having economic significance or both and that makes the invention not obvious to a person skilled in the art;
(k) "legal representative" means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person;
(l) "new invention" means any invention or technology which has not been anticipated by publication in any document or used in the country or elsewhere in the world before the date of filing of patent application with complete specification, that is to say, the matter has not fallen in public domain or that it does not form part of the state of the art;
(m) "patent" means a patent for any invention granted under this Act;
(n) "patent agent" means a person for the time being registered under this Act as a patent agent;
(o) "patented article" and "patented process" mean respectively an article or process in respect of which a patent is in force;
(p) "patentee" means the person for the time being entered on the register as the grantee or proprietor of the patent;
(q) "patent office" means the patent office referred to in section 74;
(r) "person" includes the Government;
(s) "person interested" includes a person engaged in, or in promoting, research in the same field as that to which the invention relates;
(t) "person skilled in the art" means a person having ordinary skill and knowledge in the relevant technical field;
(u) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(v) "provisional specification" means a specification referred to in section 9;
(w) "register" means the register of patents referred to in section 67;
(x) "registered patent agent" means a patent agent registered under Chapter XXI.

CHAPTER II
INVENTIONS NOT PATENTABLE

Section 3. What are not inventions.--
The following are not inventions within the meaning of this Act,--
(a) an invention which is frivolous or which claims anything obviously contrary to well established natural laws;
(b) an invention the primary or intended use or commercial exploitation of which could be contrary to public order or morality or which causes serious prejudice to human, animal or plant life or health or to the environment;
(c) the mere discovery of a scientific principle or the formulation of an abstract theory or discovery of any living thing or non-living substance occurring in nature;
(d) the mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not result in the enhancement of the known efficacy of that substance or the mere discovery of any new property or new use for a known substance or of the mere use of a known process, machine or apparatus unless such known process results in a new product or employs at least one new reactant.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this clause, salts, esters, ethers, polymorphs, metabolites, pure form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers, complexes, combinations and other derivatives of known substance shall be considered to be the same substance, unless they differ significantly in properties with regard to efficacy;
(e) a substance obtained by a mere admixture resulting only in the aggregation of the properties of the components thereof or a process for producing such substance;
(f) the mere arrangement or re-arrangement or duplication of known devices each functioning independently of one another in a known way;
(g) [Omitted by the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2002 (38 of 2002), s. 4 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003)];
(h) a method of agriculture or horticulture;
(i) any process for the medicinal, surgical, curative, prophylactic, diagnostic, therapeutic or other treatment of human beings or any process for a similar treatment of animals to render them free of disease or to increase their economic value or that of their products;
(j) plants and animals in whole or any part thereof other than micro-organisms but including seeds, varieties and species and essentially biological processes for production or propagation of plants and animals;
(k) a mathematical or business method or a computer programme per se or algorithms;
(l) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or any other aesthetic creation whatsoever including cinematographic works and television productions;
(m) a mere scheme or rule or method of performing mental act or method of playing game;
(n) a presentation of information;
(o) topography of integrated circuits;
(p) an invention which in effect, is traditional knowledge or which is an aggregation or duplication of known properties of traditionally known component or components.

Section 4. Inventions relating to atomic energy not patentable.--
No patent shall be granted in respect of an invention relating to atomic energy falling within sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.

Section 5. Inventions where only methods or processes patentable.--
[Omitted by the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005 (15 of 2005), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-1-2005)].

CHAPTER III
APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS

Section 6. Persons entitled to apply for patent.--
(1) Subject to the provisions contained in section 134, an application for a patent for an invention may be made by any of the following persons, that is to say,--
(a) by any person claiming to be the true and first inventor of the invention;
(b) by any person being the assignee of the person claiming to be the true and first inventor in respect of the right to make such an application;
(c) by the legal representative of any deceased person who immediately before his death was entitled to make such an application.

Section 7. Form of application.--
(1) Every application for a patent shall be for one invention only and shall be made in the prescribed form and filed in the patent office.
(2) Where the application is made by virtue of an assignment of the right to apply for a patent for the invention, there shall be furnished with the application, or within such period as may be prescribed after the filing of the application, proof of the right to apply.

Section 8. Information and undertaking regarding foreign applications.--
(1) Where an applicant for a patent under this Act is prosecuting an application for a patent in any country outside India in respect of the same or substantially the same invention, he shall file along with his application or within such period as may be prescribed,--
(a) a statement setting out detailed particulars of such application; and
(b) an undertaking that he will keep the Controller informed in writing from time to time of details of any other application for patent filed outside India.

Section 9. Provisional and complete specifications.--
(1) Where an application for a patent (not being a convention application or an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty) is accompanied by a provisional specification, a complete specification shall be filed within twelve months from the date of filing of the application, and if the complete specification is not so filed the application shall be deemed to be abandoned.

Section 10. Contents of specifications.--
(1) Every specification, whether provisional or complete, shall describe the invention and shall begin with a title sufficiently indicating the subject-matter to which the invention relates.
(4) Every complete specification shall--
(a) fully and particularly describe the invention and its operation or use and the method by which it is to be performed;
(b) disclose the best method of performing the invention which is known to the applicant and for which he is entitled to claim protection;
(c) end with a claim or claims defining the scope of the invention for which protection is claimed;
(d) be accompanied by an abstract to provide technical information on the invention:
Provided that the Controller may amend the abstract if he thinks fit.
(4A) In case of an international application designating India, the evidence of depositing biological material under the Budapest Treaty and disclosure of the source and geographical origin of biological material used in the invention shall be supplied in the specification.

Section 11. Priority dates of claims of a complete specification.--
(1) There shall be a priority date for each claim of a complete specification.
(2) Where a complete specification is filed in pursuance of a single application accompanied by a provisional specification, the priority date of a claim shall be the date of filing of the provisional specification.

CHAPTER IV
EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS

Section 12. Examination of application.--
(1) When the applicant has made a request for examination of an application for a patent in the prescribed manner, the application and specification and other documents related thereto shall be referred by the Controller to an examiner for making a report to him in respect of the following matters, namely:--
(a) whether the application and specification and other documents are in accordance with the requirements of this Act and of any rules made thereunder;
(b) whether there is any lawful ground of objection to the grant of the patent under this Act;
(c) whether the invention has been anticipated by publication or prior claim.

Section 13. Search for anticipation by previous publication and by prior claim.--
(1) The examiner to whom an application for a patent is referred under section 12 shall make investigation for the purpose of ascertaining whether the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification--
(a) has been anticipated by publication before the date of filing of the applicant's complete specification in any specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India; or
(b) is claimed in any claim of any other complete specification published on or after the date of filing of the applicant's complete specification.

Section 14. Consideration of report of examiner by Controller.--
Where the report of the examiner submitted to the Controller under section 12 is adverse to the applicant or requires any amendment of the application, specification or other documents, the Controller shall communicate the gist of objections to the applicant.

Section 15. Power of Controller to refuse or require amended application.--
Where the Controller is satisfied that the application or any specification or any other document filed in pursuance thereof does not comply with the requirements of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, the Controller may refuse the application or require the application, specification or other documents to be amended to his satisfaction.

Section 16. Power of Controller to make orders respecting division of application.--
(1) A person who has made an application for a patent under this Act may, at any time before the grant of the patent, if he so desires or with a view to remedy the objection raised by the Controller, divide the application and file a further application in respect of an invention disclosed in the provisional or complete specification already filed.

Section 17. Power of Controller to make orders respecting dating of application.--
(1) At any time after the filing of an application and before the grant of the patent under this Act, the Controller may, at the request of the applicant, direct that the application shall be post-dated to such date as may be specified in the request.

Section 18. Powers of Controller in cases of anticipation.--
(1) Where the Controller is satisfied that the invention claimed in a complete specification has been anticipated by any publication, he may refuse to grant the patent unless the applicant amends his specification to his satisfaction.

Section 19. Powers of Controller in case of potential infringement.--
(1) If the Controller is satisfied that an invention claimed in a complete specification cannot be performed without substantial risk of infringement of a claim of any other patent, he may direct that a reference to that other patent shall be inserted in the complete specification by way of notice to the public.

Section 20. Powers of Controller to make orders regarding substitution of applicants.--
(1) If the Controller is satisfied, on a claim made in the prescribed manner at any time before a patent has been granted, that by virtue of any assignment or agreement in writing, the claimant would, if the patent were then granted, be entitled to the patent or to the interest of the applicant therein, the Controller may direct that the application shall proceed in the names of the claimant and the applicant.

Section 21. Time for putting application in order for grant.--
(1) An application for a patent shall be deemed to have been abandoned unless within such period as may be prescribed, the applicant has complied with all the requirements imposed on him by or under this Act.

CHAPTER V
OPPOSITION PROCEEDINGS TO GRANT OF PATENTS

Section 25. Opposition to the grant of patent.--
(1) Where an application for a patent has been published but a patent has not been granted, any person may, in writing, represent by way of opposition to the Controller against the grant of patent on the ground--
(a) that the applicant for the patent or the person under or through whom he claims, wrongfully obtained the invention or any part thereof from him or from a person of whom he is the legal representative;
(b) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification has been published before the priority date of the claim in any document in India or elsewhere;
(c) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is publicly known or publicly used in India before the priority date of the claim;
(d) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is obvious or does not involve any inventive step, having regard to the matter published as mentioned in clause (b) or having regard to what was used in India before the priority date of the claim;
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is not an invention within the meaning of this Act, or is not patentable under this Act;
(f) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and clearly describe the invention or the method by which it is to be performed;
(g) that the applicant has failed to disclose to the Controller the information required by section 8 or has furnished information which was false in any material particular;
(h) that in the case of a convention application, the application was not made within twelve months from the date of the first application for protection for the invention made in a convention country by the applicant or a person from whom he derives title;
(i) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source or geographical origin of biological material used for the invention;
(j) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was anticipated having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous community in India or elsewhere.
(2) At any time after the grant of patent but before the expiry of a period of one year from the date of publication of grant of a patent, any person interested may give notice of opposition to the Controller in the prescribed manner on any of the grounds specified in sub-section (1).

Section 26. In cases of obtaining Controller may treat application as application of opponent.--
(1) Where in any opposition proceeding under this Act the Controller finds that the invention has been wrongfully obtained from the opponent, he may treat the application as having been made by the opponent.

Section 28. Mention of inventor as such in patent.--
(1) The inventor of any invention shall have a right to be mentioned as such in the patent granted for the invention.

CHAPTER VI
ANTICIPATION

Section 29. Anticipation by previous publication.--
(1) An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only that the invention was published before the priority date of the claim in a specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India or in any document published in India or elsewhere, if the applicant or patentee proves that the matter published was obtained from him or a person from whom he derives title without consent.

Section 30. Anticipation by previous communication to Government.--
An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of the communication of the invention to the Government or to any person authorized by the Government to investigate the invention.

Section 31. Anticipation by public display, etc.--
An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of the display of the invention at an industrial or other exhibition to which the provisions of this section have been extended by the Central Government.

Section 32. Anticipation by public working.--
An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of the public working of the invention in India, for the purpose of reasonable trial only.

Section 33. Anticipation by use and publication after provisional specification.--
Where a complete specification is filed in pursuance of an application accompanied by a provisional specification, the claim shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of publication or use of the invention in India after the date of filing of the provisional specification.

Section 34. No anticipation if circumstances are only as described in sections 29, 30, 31 and 32.--
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Controller shall not refuse to grant a patent, and a patent shall not be revoked or invalidated, by reason only of any circumstance which under section 29, 30, 31 or 32 does not constitute an anticipation of the invention.

CHAPTER VII
PROVISIONS FOR SECRECY OF CERTAIN INVENTIONS

Section 35. Secrecy directions relating to inventions relevant for defence purposes.--
(1) Where, in respect of an application for a patent, it appears to the Controller that the invention is one of a class notified by the Central Government as relevant for defence purposes, he may give directions for prohibiting or restricting the publication of information with respect to the invention.

Section 39. Residents not to apply for patents outside India without prior permission.--
(1) No person resident in India shall, except under the authority of a written permit granted by or on behalf of the Controller, make or cause to be made any application outside India for the grant of a patent for an invention unless an application for a patent for the same invention has been made in India not less than six weeks before the application outside India.

CHAPTER VIII
GRANT OF PATENTS AND RIGHTS CONFERRED THEREBY

Section 43. Grant of patents.--
(1) Where an application for a patent has been found to be in order for grant, a patent shall be granted as expeditiously as possible to the applicant or joint applicants with the seal of the patent office.

Section 45. Date of patent.--
(1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, every patent shall be dated as of the date on which the application for patent was filed.

Section 46. Form, extent and effect of patent.--
(1) Every patent shall be in the prescribed form and shall have effect throughout India.

Section 47. Grant of patent to be subject to certain conditions.--
The grant of a patent under this Act shall be subject to the conditions that--
(a) any machine, apparatus or other article in respect of which the patent is granted, or any article made by the use of the process in respect of which the patent is granted, may be imported or made by or on behalf of the Government for the purpose merely of its own use;
(b) any process in respect of which the patent is granted may be used by or on behalf of the Government for the purpose merely of its own use;
(c) any machine, apparatus or other article or process may be made or used by any person for the purpose merely of experiment or research including the imparting of instruction to pupils.

Section 48. Rights of patentees.--
Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and the conditions specified in section 47, a patent granted under this Act shall confer upon the patentee--
(a) where the subject matter of the patent is a product, the exclusive right to prevent third parties, who do not have his consent, from the act of making, using, offering for sale, selling or importing for those purposes that product in India;
(b) where the subject matter of the patent is a process, the exclusive right to prevent third parties, who do not have his consent, from the act of using that process, and from the act of using, offering for sale, selling or importing for those purposes the product obtained directly by that process in India.

Section 49. Patent rights not infringed when used on foreign vessels, etc., temporarily within India.--
Where a vessel or aircraft or land vehicle registered in a foreign country comes into India temporarily, the use of an invention on board such vessel or vehicle shall not constitute an infringement of the patent.

Section 50. Rights of co-owners of patents.--
(1) Where a patent is granted to two or more persons, each of those persons shall, unless an agreement to the contrary is in force, be entitled to an equal undivided share in the patent.

Section 53. Term of patent.--
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the term of every patent granted, after the commencement of the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2002, and the term of every patent which has not expired and has not ceased to have effect, shall be twenty years from the date of filing of the application for the patent.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this sub-section, the date of filing of the application in respect of a convention application or an application under PCT shall be the international filing date.

CHAPTER IX
PATENTS OF ADDITION

Section 54. Patents of addition.--
(1) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, where an application is made for a patent in respect of any improvement in or modification of an invention described or disclosed in the complete specification filed in respect of the main invention, the applicant may apply for a patent of addition.

Section 55. Term of patent of addition.--
(1) A patent of addition shall be granted for a term equal to that of the patent for the main invention, or so much thereof as has not expired, and shall remain in force during that term or until the cessation of the main patent and no longer.

CHAPTER X
AMENDMENT OF SPECIFICATIONS

Section 57. Amendment of application and specification before Controller.--
(1) Subject to the provisions of section 59, the Controller may, upon application made under this section in the prescribed manner by an applicant for a patent or a patentee, allow the application for patent or the complete specification or any document relating thereto to be amended subject to such conditions as the Controller thinks fit.

Section 58. Amendment of specification before High Court.--
(1) In any proceeding before the High Court for the revocation of a patent, the High Court may, if it thinks fit, allow the patentee to amend his complete specification in such manner, and subject to such terms as to costs, advertisement or otherwise, as the High Court may think fit.

Section 59. Supplementary provisions as to amendment of specification.--
(1) No amendment of an application for a patent or a complete specification or any document relating thereto shall be made except by way of disclaimer, correction or explanation, and no amendment thereof shall be allowed, except for the purpose of incorporation of a fact, the effect of which would be that the specification as amended would claim or describe matter not in substance disclosed or shown in the specification before the amendment, or that any claim of the specification as amended would not fall wholly within the scope of a claim of the specification before the amendment.

CHAPTER XI
RESTORATION OF LAPSED PATENTS

Section 60. Applications for restoration of lapsed patents.--
(1) Where a patent has ceased to have effect by reason of failure to pay any renewal fee within the prescribed period, the patentee or his legal representative may, within eighteen months from the date on which the patent ceased to have effect, make an application for the restoration of the patent.

CHAPTER XII
SURRENDER AND REVOCATION OF PATENTS

Section 63. Surrender of patents.--
(1) A patentee may, at any time by giving notice in the prescribed manner to the Controller, offer to surrender his patent.

Section 64. Revocation of patents.--
(1) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, a patent, whether granted before or after the commencement of this Act, may, be revoked on a petition of any person interested or of the Central Government by the High Court or on a counter-claim in a suit for infringement of the patent by the High Court on any of the following grounds, namely:--
(a) that the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification, was claimed in a valid claim of earlier priority date contained in the complete specification of another patent granted in India;
(b) that the patent was granted on the application of a person not entitled under the provisions of this Act to apply therefor;
(c) that the patent was obtained wrongfully in contravention of the rights of the petitioner or any person under or through whom he claims;
(d) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an invention within the meaning of this Act;
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is not new, having regard to what was publicly known or publicly used in India before the priority date of the claim or to what was published in India or elsewhere in any of the documents referred to in section 13;
(f) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is obvious or does not involve any inventive step, having regard to what was publicly known or publicly used in India or what was published in India or elsewhere before the priority date of the claim;
(g) that the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification, is not useful;
(h) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and fairly describe the invention and the method by which it is to be performed;
(i) that the scope of any claim of the complete specification is not sufficiently and clearly defined or that any claim of the complete specification is not fairly based on the matter disclosed in the specification;
(j) that the patent was obtained on a false suggestion or representation;
(k) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not patentable under this Act;
(l) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was secretly used in India, otherwise than as mentioned in sub-section (3), before the priority date of the claim;
(m) that the applicant for the patent has failed to disclose to the Controller the information required by section 8 or has furnished information which was false in any material particular;
(n) that the applicant has failed to comply with the direction passed under section 35 or has made or caused to be made an application for the grant of a patent in contravention of section 39;
(o) that leave to amend the complete specification under section 57 or section 58 was obtained by fraud;
(p) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source or geographical origin of biological material used for the invention;
(q) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was anticipated having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous community in India or elsewhere.

Section 65. Revocation of patent or amendment of specification on directions from Central Government in cases relating to atomic energy.--
(1) Where at any time after grant of a patent, the Central Government is satisfied that a patent is for an invention relating to atomic energy for which no patent can be granted under section 4, the Central Government may direct the Controller to revoke the patent.

Section 66. Revocation of patent in public interest.--
Where the Central Government is of opinion that a patent or the mode in which the exercising of the rights conferred thereby is mischievous to the State or generally prejudicial to the public, it may, after giving the patentee an opportunity of being heard, make a declaration to that effect in the Official Gazette and thereupon the patent shall be deemed to be revoked.

CHAPTER XIII
REGISTER OF PATENTS

Section 67. Register of patents and particulars to be entered therein.--
(1) There shall be kept at the patent office a register of patents, wherein shall be entered the names and addresses of grantees of patents, notifications of assignments and of transmissions of patents, of licences under patents, and of amendments, revocations and expirations of patents.

Section 68. Assignments, etc., not to be valid unless in writing and registered.--
An assignment of a patent or of a share in a patent, a licence or mortgage or the creation of any other interest in a patent shall not be valid unless the same were in writing and the agreement between the parties is reduced to the form of a document embodying all the terms and conditions governing their rights and obligations and the application for registration of such document is filed in the patent office.

CHAPTER XVI
WORKING OF PATENTS, COMPULSORY LICENCES AND REVOCATION

Section 83. General principles applicable to working of patented inventions.--
In exercising the powers conferred by this Chapter, regard shall be had to the following general considerations, namely:--
(a) that patents are granted to encourage inventions and to secure that the inventions are worked in India on a commercial scale and to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable without undue delay;
(b) that they are not granted merely to enable patentees to enjoy a monopoly for the importation of the patented article;
(c) that the protection and enforcement of patent rights should contribute to the promotion of technological innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and users of technological knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and economic welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations;
(d) that patents granted do not impede protection of public health and nutrition and should not act as a barrier to the availability of medicine in terms of healthcare;
(e) that patent rights should not be abused by the patentee or person claiming through him;
(f) that the patent is granted to make the benefit of the patented invention available at reasonably affordable prices to the public.

Section 84. Compulsory licences.--
(1) At any time after the expiration of three years from the date of the grant of a patent, any person interested may make an application to the Controller for grant of compulsory licence on patent on any of the following grounds, namely:--
(a) that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the patented invention have not been satisfied; or
(b) that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably affordable price; or
(c) that the patented invention is not worked in the territory of India.
(2) An application under this section may be made by any person notwithstanding that he is already the holder of a licence under the patent.

Section 85. Revocation of patents by the Controller for non-working.--
(1) Where, in respect of a patent, a compulsory licence has been granted, the Central Government or any person interested may, after the expiration of two years from the date of order granting compulsory licence, apply to the Controller for an order revoking the patent on the ground that the patented invention has not been worked in the territory of India.

Section 88. Powers of Controller in granting compulsory licences.--
(1) Where the Controller is satisfied on an application made under section 84 that the grounds specified therein have been established, he may order the patentee to grant a licence upon such terms as he may deem fit.

Section 90. Terms and conditions of compulsory licences.--
(1) In settling the terms and conditions of a licence under section 84, the Controller shall endeavour to secure--
(a) that the royalty and other remuneration, if any, reserved to the patentee or other person beneficially entitled to the patent, is reasonable, having regard to the nature of the invention, the expenditure incurred by the patentee in making the invention or in developing it and obtaining a patent;
(b) that the patented invention is worked to the fullest extent by the person to whom the licence is granted and with reasonable profit;
(c) that the patented articles are made available to the public at reasonably affordable prices;
(d) that the licence granted is a non-exclusive licence;
(e) that the licence is non-assignable.

Section 92. Special provision for compulsory licences on notification by Central Government.--
(1) If the Central Government is satisfied, in respect of any patent in force in circumstances of national emergency or in circumstances of extreme urgency or in case of public non-commercial use, that it is necessary that compulsory licences should be granted at any time after the grant thereof, it may make a declaration to that effect by notification in the Official Gazette.

Section 92A. Compulsory licence for export of patented pharmaceutical products in certain exceptional circumstances.--
(1) Compulsory licence shall be available for manufacture and export of patented pharmaceutical products to any country having insufficient or no manufacturing capacity in the pharmaceutical sector for the concerned product to address public health problems, provided such compulsory licence has been granted by such country or such country has, by notification or otherwise, allowed importation of the patented pharmaceutical products from India.

CHAPTER XVIII
SUITS CONCERNING INFRINGEMENT OF PATENTS

Section 104. Jurisdiction of courts.--
No suit for a declaration under section 105 or for any relief under section 106 or for infringement of a patent shall be instituted in any court inferior to a District Court having jurisdiction to try the suit:
Provided that where a counter-claim for revocation of the patent is made by the defendant, the suit, along with the counter-claim, shall be transferred to the High Court for decision.

Section 104A. Burden of proof in case of suits for infringement of process patent.--
(1) In any suit for infringement of a patent, where the subject matter of patent is a process for obtaining a product, the court may direct the defendant to prove that the process used by him to obtain an identical product is different from the patented process if the product obtained by the patented process is new.

Section 105. Power of court to make declaration as to non-infringement.--
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 106, any person may institute a suit against the patentee for a declaration that the use by him of any process, or the making, use or sale by him of any article, does not, or would not, constitute an infringement of a claim of a patent.

Section 106. Power of court to grant relief in cases of groundless threats of infringement proceedings.--
(1) Where any person threatening by means of circulars, advertisements or otherwise any other person with an action or proceeding for infringement of a patent, any person aggrieved thereby may bring a suit against the person making the threats.

Section 107. Defences in suits for infringement.--
(1) In any suit for infringement of a patent, every ground on which a patent may be revoked under section 64 shall be available as a ground of defence.

Section 107A. Certain acts not to be considered as infringement.--
For the purposes of this Act,--
(a) any act of making, constructing, using, selling or importing a patented invention solely for uses reasonably related to the development and submission of information required under any law for the time being in force, in India, or in a country other than India, that regulates the manufacture, construction, use, sale or import of any product;
(b) importation of patented products by any person from a person who is duly authorised under the law to produce and sell or distribute the product,
shall not be considered as an infringement of patent rights.

Section 108. Reliefs in suits for infringement.--
(1) The reliefs which a court may grant in any suit for infringement include an injunction (subject to such terms, if any, as the court thinks fit) and, at the option of the plaintiff, either damages or an account of profits.

CHAPTER XIX
APPEALS

Section 116. Appeals to High Court.--
(1) No appeal shall lie from any decision, order or direction made or issued under this Act by the Central Government, or from any act or order of the Controller for the purpose of giving effect to any such decision, order or direction.
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided in sub-section (1), an appeal shall lie to the High Court from any decision, order or direction of the Controller of Central Government under any of the following provisions, namely: section 15, section 16, section 17, section 18, section 19, section 20, sub-section (4) of section 25, section 28, section 57, section 60, section 63, section 69, section 78, section 84, section 85, section 88, section 91, section 92 or section 94.

Section 117A. Appeals to High Court.--
(1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from any decision, order or direction of the Controller or Central Government under section 15, section 16, section 17, section 18, section 19, section 20, sub-section (4) of section 25, section 28, section 57, section 60, section 63, section 69, section 78, section 84, section 85, section 88, section 91, section 92 or section 94.

CHAPTER XX
PENALTIES

Section 118. Penalty for contravention of secrecy provisions or section 39.--
If any person fails to comply with any direction given under section 35 or makes or causes to be made an application for the grant of a patent in contravention of section 39, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 120. Unauthorized claim of patent rights.--
If any person falsely represents that any article sold by him is patented in India or is the subject of an application for a patent in India, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.

Section 146. Reports as to working of patented inventions.--
(1) The Controller may, at any time during the continuance of the patent, require the patentee or the licensee, give information or periodic statements as to the extent to which the patented invention has been commercially worked in India.
(2) Every patentee and every licensee shall furnish to the Controller in such form and manner as may be prescribed, statements as to the commercial working of the patented invention in India.

Section 159. Power of Central Government to make rules.--
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
